SIMD-0127: Syscall: Get-Sysvar (#127)
solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/0127-get-sysvar-syscall.md

---
simd: '0127'
title: sol_get_sysvar syscall
authors:
  - Richard Patel
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Draft
created: 2024-03-15
---

## Summary

SIMD-0127 introduces the syscall `sol_get_sysvar` which allows BPF programs
to retrieve any sysvar.

New invariants are placed on the sysvar cache to enable safe retrieval.

Existing syscalls to retrieve sysvars are henceforth considered obsolete.

## Motivation

Sysvars are special accounts that are implicitly modified by the runtime.
Certain sysvars are essential for operation of the network.  For example, the
system program reads the 'recent block hashes' sysvar to provide durable nonce
functionality.

Currently, programs can read sysvars can using one of these three methods:

1. Via explicit account access by specifying the sysvar address in the list of
   transaction accounts
2. Via API calls to the sysvar cache (for native programs only)
3. Via syscalls that copy the sysvar content to virtual machine memory

>    (for BPF programs only, does not work for all sysvars)

Reviewer: More accurately: "intentionally not made available for all sysvars".

```c
uint64_t sol_get_example_sysvar( void * dest_addr );
```

When called, the syscall handler will copy the sysvar to the given memory
location.  Notably, BPF programs do not inform the syscall handler of the
expected size of the sysvar.  BPF programs thus effectively assume that the
requested sysvars will forever have the same size.

This prevents future upgrades that shrink or extend sysvars.

### Syscall API fragmentation

The following sysvars are currently accessible using syscalls:

- `SysvarC1ock11111111111111111111111111111111` (via `sol_get_clock_sysvar`)
- `SysvarEpochRewards1111111111111111111111111` (via `sol_get_epoch_rewards_sysvar`)
- `SysvarEpochSchedu1e111111111111111111111111` (via `sol_get_epoch_schedule_sysvar`)
- `SysvarFees111111111111111111111111111111111` (via `sol_get_fees_sysvar`)
- `Sysvar1nstructions1111111111111111111111111` (indirectly via `sol_get_processed_sibling_instruction`)
- `SysvarLastRestartS1ot1111111111111111111111` (via `sol_get_last_restart_slot`)
- `SysvarRent111111111111111111111111111111111` (via `sol_get_rent_sysvar`)

BPF programs cannot access the following sysvars using syscalls.

- `SysvarRecentB1ockHashes11111111111111111111`

> - `SysvarRewards111111111111111111111111111111`

Reviewer: This may or may not be necessary for the proposal, but these two sysvars are marked deprecated.

https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/e8526f60aa80d986111f935717f003d6be7670df/sdk/program/src/sysvar/recent_blockhashes.rs#L8

https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/e8526f60aa80d986111f935717f003d6be7670df/sdk/program/src/sysvar/rewards.rs#L1

As per [SIMD-0088](./0088-enable-core-bpf-programs.md), an effort is underway
to reduce code complexity of the Solana runtime by porting native programs to
core BPF programs.

These new programs target full compatibility with their predecessors to avoid
introducing breaking API changes.  In some cases, native programs read a sysvar
from the sysvar cache without requiring the user to include this sysvar in the
transaction account list.  This happens in the stake program 'redelegate'
instruction, for example.

As a result, it is currently impossible to port certain native programs to core
BPF programs.  Another factility to expose sysvars to the virtual machine is
required.

### Optimizing existing user programs

Reading sysvars with the proposed syscall is expected to be more efficient than
an explicit account access.  Removing explicit account accesses to sysvars will
generally result in smaller transactions.  Reducing the amount of account data
that is mapped into virtual machine memory may also yield cost savings.

## Alternatives Considered

Other mechanisms considered that provide sysvar data to BPF programs are as
follows:

### Sysvar-specific syscalls

> TODO

Reviewer: You could just say "change nothing; this is what we currently do".

> ### New memory regions
> 
> TODO

Reviewer: Maybe something like this?

```suggestion
### New memory regions

A new memory region in the VM could be introduced to store sysvar data, which
could then be made available to BPF programs through an interface around raw
pointers, which loads the data similarly to the interface proposed herein.

This approach would depend on direct mapping of host memory to VM memory,
which has been in development for some time and requires further research
and development to introduce safely to the VM ABI. This extensive R&D period
would mean Core BPF program initiatives would remain blocked.

Without direct mapping, sysvar data would be fully copied to this memory
region each time a VM is created (currently one per transaction processed),
causing a degradation in runtime performance and likely reducing compute
by far less compared to the compute savings posed by this proposal.
```

TODO

### `sol_get_sysvar` syscalls

TODO this is outdated

```c
/* sol_get_sysvar_size queries the serialized byte size of a sysvar.
   It is equal to the length of the serialization of the sysvar value.
   The sysvar value is taken in the sysvar cache.

   sysvar_id points to the 32 byte address of the sysvar.

   If a non-empty sysvar was found in the sysvar cache, returns the
   byte size of that sysvar.

   If the requested sysvar was not found, is corrupt, is
   unsupported for the current feature set, or is zero size, returns 0.

   This syscall aborts the transaction if (and only if):
   - The compute budget was exhausted */

uint64_t
sol_get_sysvar_size( /* r1 */ void const * sysvar_id );

/* sol_get_sysvar copies sysvar data to VM memory.

   sysvar_id points to the 32 byte address of the sysvar.

   A sysvar is valid if sol_get_sysvar_size(sysvar_id) returns non-zero.
   If the sysvar is not valid, returns zero without writing to out.

   The byte range [offset,offset+size) selects the range of data to be
   copied. The sysvar data is the serialized value of the corresponding
   sysvar cache entry.
   The size of this sysvar data is returned by sol_get_sysvar_size.

>    Copies the sysvar data to [out,out+size) and returns 1 if the sysvar is valid.

Reviewer: It sounds like this does offer a lot of flexibility for larger sysvars, particularly when only a subset or a single element of the data is being requested. However, this still would not enable a BPF program to request the full data for a sysvar like `SlotHashes`, correct? The program would still face the current "too large to copy" resource limitation?

Reviewer 2: if you really wanted to, you could take the whole thing to heap. i believe you said slot hashes is like 18kb? do you need more than one entry for your usecase tho? i only need one for mine

Reviewer: ALT nope but Vote does yeah. Unfortunately, Vote needs something like `SlotHashes::get_slots() -> &[Slot]`.

Reviewer: Aside from that, it seems like single-element lookups would suffice for all the other use cases I have. There's three I can think of across ALT, Vote, and Feature Gate.

directly coupling new sysvar fetch functions to new syscalls.

### New VM Memory Regions

A new memory region in the VM could be introduced to store sysvar data, which
could then be made available to BPF programs through an interface around raw
pointers, which loads the data similarly to the interface proposed herein.

This approach would depend on direct mapping of host memory to VM memory,
which has been in development for some time and requires further research
and development to introduce safely to the VM ABI. This extensive R&D period
would mean Core BPF program initiatives would remain blocked.

Without direct mapping, sysvar data would be fully copied to this memory
region each time a VM is created (currently one per transaction processed),
causing a degradation in runtime performance and likely reducing compute
by far less compared to the compute savings posed by this proposal.

## Detailed Design

By simply redefining the `get` API to accept `offset` and `length` parameters,
one single `get` syscall can be used by all sysvars to retrieve data.

```rust
fn get(offset: usize, length: usize) -> &[u8];

> ```

Reviewer 2: note the current unified `get` api is implementation-defined, built on top of a set of sysvar-specific syscalls. so a new unified syscall would need to accept an argument indicating which sysvar to fetch and read/write from. so we would need a protocol-defined enum mapping sysvars to u8 tags, or we need to pass in the account id of the sysvar and have a protocol-defined list of allowed account ids/sysvars

on that topic im in favor of explicitly not supporting `Instructions` via this mechanism. i think the must-haves are clock, rent, slot hashes, stake history, last restart slot. im less sure about epoch schedule/rewards, assume we dont need slot history, and assume its obvious we dont need fees or recent blockhashes

we should also be clear that sysvars can be added or removed in the future... although in practice i guess we can never really remove them if programs have come to reply on them

also noting that syscalls generally (always?) return a u64 with a success/error code and the output buffer needs to be passed in as a pointer

Reviewer: > a new unified syscall would need to accept an argument indicating which sysvar to fetch and read/write from

Good point. I missed that bit. Richie's original draft had the sysvar address being passed. Personally I don't see a reason to opt for the 32-byte address over a single-byte enum, do you? Regardless, I've added this to the proposal.

> on that topic im in favor of explicitly not supporting `Instructions` via this mechanism. i think the must-haves are clock, rent, slot hashes, stake history, last restart slot.

I think it probably makes the most sense to couple this enum, which describes which sysvars are available through the unified syscall, to the sysvar cache. I think if we start to include things from the invoke context in here it might get a bit complicated. In the future, if we decide to apply a unified interface to the invoke context data as well, we can draft a new proposal. What do you think?

I don't see a particular reason to omit anything from the sysvar cache that isn't deprecated - like the epoch schedule/rewards. If they're there, might as well make them available.

> we should also be clear that sysvars can be added or removed in the future... although in practice i guess we can never really remove them if programs have come to reply on them

I touched on adding new ones a few times in here, but yeah I specifically didn't say remove because that would be a deprecation process for the forward-facing sysvar interface, not this unified syscall.

> also noting that syscalls generally (always?) return a u64 with a success/error code and the output buffer needs to be passed in as a pointer

True, I was trying to psuedo-code demonstrate that you'd provide those params and get a slice, but you're right I should probably be a bit more explicit on how the syscall-sysvar relationship would work.

Reviewer: Pushed changes with this feedback addressed!

The specifics of returning optional values or errors can be left up to the
implementation, but the following cases would be handled with errors:

- The sysvar data is unavailable.
- The sysavr data is corrupt.

> - The provided offset or length would be out of bounds on the sysvar data.

Reviewer 2: it occurs to me i dont actually know if ? inside syscalls transforms to an error code, or aborts. or if error codes have defined meanings for all syscalls or whether each syscall can define its own... in any event it would be good to define a way for the syscall to signal these error conditions to the implementation. inclined to say that if the sysvar is unavailable (if a sysvar is deprecated/removed, or specifically if we support EpochRewards) it should return an error code that the implementation can handle, but corrupt data or out of bounds read should abort

also im not sure what happens if the syscall attempts an out of bounds write. presumably it cant detect and prevent this because everything we do with this is unsafe transmute... at the least, the spec should say the caller must ensure their buffer is long enough

Reviewer: > it occurs to me i dont actually know if ? inside syscalls transforms to an error code, or aborts.

It does indeed! It gets turned into a `u64` but then turned back into an `InstructionError` in the sysvar interface. So we have lots of flexibility there to define our own syscall-level errors, either with existing `InstructionError` variants or `InstructionError::Custom`.

> also im not sure what happens if the syscall attempts an out of bounds write.

The way I was thinking about this was that it would be an out of bounds _read_, and that's easy to detect because say you get `offset: 90` and your desired sysvar is only `60` bytes long, throw.

Sysvars themselves should have internal logic for understanding their own size
and the size of their entries if they are a list-based data structure. With this

> information, each sysvar can customize how it wishes to drive the `get` syscall.

Reviewer 2: highly in favor of the unstated implication here ie that this syscall is not made available to programs directly and must be provided through an interface (though perhaps that is already the case for all syscalls?) so we dont lock ourselves into memory layout decisions more than we already are

---
simd: '0127'
title: Get-Sysvar Syscall
authors:

>   - Richard Patel (Jump)

Reviewer: Done.

reimplementation difficult.

## Alternatives Considered

Other mechanisms considered that provide sysvar data to BPF programs are as
follows:

### Sysvar-Specific Syscalls

This approach would involve changing nothing. We'd continue on the same course,
directly coupling new sysvar fetch functions to new syscalls.

### New VM Memory Regions

A new memory region in the VM could be introduced to store sysvar data, which
could then be made available to BPF programs through an interface around raw
pointers, which loads the data similarly to the interface proposed herein.

This approach would depend on direct mapping of host memory to VM memory,
which has been in development for some time and requires further research
and development to introduce safely to the VM ABI. This extensive R&D period
would mean Core BPF program initiatives would remain blocked.

Without direct mapping, sysvar data would be fully copied to this memory
region each time a VM is created (currently one per transaction processed),
causing a degradation in runtime performance and likely reducing compute
by far less compared to the compute savings posed by this proposal.

## New Terminology

N/A.

> ## Detailed Design

Reviewer: Sorry, I guess I'm not entirely sure how much of our syscall interface is a specification or Agave-specific. For example, do all invoke contexts look the same? If so, we can expand this to say "anything from the invoke context is retrievable", but I was sort of under the impression that invoke context and sysvar cache can look different amongst clients. FD might serve syscalls from some other data source entirely when it comes to sysvars. Nobody says FD has to specifically have a sysvar _cache_. Right?

> ## Detailed Design

Reviewer: Ok fair enough. Thanks for all of that context, it's helpful for this and other efforts!

I'll include the sysvars that are accessible by the new syscall in the proposal. As for your points in the earlier message:

> 1. What about the sysvars that are not in the sysvar cache? (Of which there are a bunch) (example: "the sysvar getter does not expose sysvars that are not in the sysvar cache)

I don't particularly see a valid reason for _not_ including data outside of the sysvar cache, but being specific about it. For example, I think it's reasonable to say things from the invoke context - instructions, recent blockhash, etc. - could be made available from this getter. Perhaps everything from the sysvar cache and select items from the invoke context?

> 2. What about any newly added sysvars? (example verbiage: "Unless specified otherwise, any sysvars that are introduced into the sysvar cache in the future also become visible via the sysvar getter")

Yeah, I think this should go in as-is.

> 3. The sysvar cache contains logical objects, not a byte serialization of these objects. Underspecifying this can lead to a consensus issue. When restoring the sysvar cache from the account DB, the sysvar cache ignores trailing data when deserializing. So does the sysvar getter include or exclude this trailing data?

I would lean towards no, it should not include it. It should include whatever's available to transaction processing, and if in the future we decide the **sysvar cache** _shouldn't_ ignore those trailing bytes, they're automatically made available to this syscall via the cache.

> ## Detailed Design

Reviewer 2: imo we should specify a list of sysvars that the syscall supports and leave it at that

i was regarding the sysvar cache as an implementation detail that shouldnt be explicitly referenced in the specification of this at all, but it sounds like we need to make this explicit (and expect that firedancer will copy the sysvar cache mechanism exactly) because the cache may have consistency issues, so the source of the data could affect consensus?

Defining one single `get` API to retrieve data from the sysvar cache can be used
by all forward-facing sysvar interfaces. This `get` API should require the
`sysvar_id` to retrieve data from, the `offset` at which to start copying data,

> and the `length` of the bytes to copy and return to the caller.

Reviewer: Duplicate of below.

The `sysvar_id` can be the address of the sysvar account or simply a single-byte
enum aligned with the available sysvars in the sysvar cache. This is an
implementation detail.

A psuedo-code representation of the `get` API is as follows, where the returned
value is the slice of bytes from the requested sysvar.

```rust
fn get(sysvar_id: SysvarID, offset: usize, length: usize) -> &[u8];

> ```

Reviewer: I can walk this away from Rust. I can't promise C. In doing so, do you have any qualms about making sysvar ID an enum value versus a 32-byte address?

> ```

Reviewer: I think I've managed to answer my own question on this.

exactly like the existing syscalls do for sysvar data.

Generally, the following cases would be handled with errors:

- The sysvar data is unavailable.
- The sysvar data is corrupt.
- The provided offset or length would be out of bounds on the sysvar data.

Sysvars themselves should have internal logic for understanding their own size
and the size of their entries if they are a list-based data structure. With this
information, each sysvar can customize how it wishes to drive the `get` syscall.

A list-based sysvar - say `SlotHashes` - could leverage this API like so:

```rust
fn get(index: usize) -> SlotHash {
  let length = size_of::<SlotHash>();
  let offset = index * length;
  syscall::get(offset, length)
}
```

Any sysvar that wishes to offer a more robust API would then be responsible for
defining such an interface, rather than pushing that burden onto the syscall
interface. For example, `SlotHashes` could offer something like the following:

```rust
fn get_hash(index: usize) -> Hash {
  let offset = index * size_of::<SlotHash>() + size_of::<Slot>();
  let length = size_of::<Hash>();
  syscall::get(offset, length)
}

> ```

Reviewer: OK I can make this less verbose then, and remove the code snippets.

> ```

Reviewer: Done.

directly coupling new sysvar fetch functions to new syscalls.

### New VM Memory Regions

A new memory region in the VM could be introduced to store sysvar data, which
could then be made available to BPF programs through an interface around raw
pointers, which loads the data similarly to the interface proposed herein.

This approach would depend on direct mapping of host memory to VM memory,
which has been in development for some time and requires further research
and development to introduce safely to the VM ABI. This extensive R&D period
would mean Core BPF program initiatives would remain blocked.

Without direct mapping, sysvar data would be fully copied to this memory
region each time a VM is created (currently one per transaction processed),
causing a degradation in runtime performance and likely reducing compute
by far less compared to the compute savings posed by this proposal.

Even with direct mapping, this change makes address translation more complex
and therefore slows down _all_ memory accesses.

## New Terminology

N/A.

## Detailed Design

A single `sol_get_sysvar` syscall can be defined, which can be used by all

> forward-facing sysvar interfaces to retrieve data from any sysvar.

Reviewer: CUs added.

```c
/**
 * Retrieves a slice of data from a sysvar and copies it to VM memory.
 *
 * @param sysvar_id The identifier of the sysvar to retrieve data from.
 * @param var_addr  VM memory address to copy the retrieved data to.
 * @param offset    The offset to start copying data from.
 * @param length    The length of data to copy, in bytes.
 * @return          A 64-bit unsigned integer error code:
 *                    - 0 if the operation is successful.
 *                    - Non-zero error code.
 *
 * If the operation is not successful, data will not be written to the
 * provided VM memory address.
 */
uint64_t sol_get_sysvar(
  /* r1 */ void const * sysvar_id,
  /* r2 */ uint8_t *    var_addr,
  /* r3 */ uint64_t     offset,
  /* r4 */ uint64_t     length,
);

```

If the following conditions are not met, this syscall will return an error:

- The sysvar data is available to read.
- The sysvar data is not corrupt.
- `offset` + `length` is in the range `[0, 2^64)`.
- `var_addr` + `length` is in the range `[0, 2^64)`.

> - Each byte in the range starting at `var_addr` of size `length` is writable.

Reviewer: > Sorry, I think I commented this before, but I can't find my comment anymore --
> 
> If the user passes a non-writable range or there is a overflow, the syscall should abort the VM, not return an error. (Which in turn aborts the transaction) This is different from graceful errors, where the syscall just returns non-zero and the VM can continue.

You wrote this on 133, but yes I can update this proposal to say the same thing.

> - Each byte in the range starting at `var_addr` of size `length` is writable.

Reviewer: I can try to write it a bit more succinctly, but I like the overall approach.

I'm still not sure how you calculate the CU, as I wrote in my reply to you on 133.
Once I understand that better I can update the CU bits.

> - The syscall will always attempt to consume the same amount of CUs irrespective of control flow.

I'm assuming this means that even if we throw an error early on in the execution,
the same number of CUs are consumed as if the process finished successfully?

> - Each byte in the range starting at `var_addr` of size `length` is writable.

Reviewer: Yeah agreed!

> - Each byte in the range starting at `var_addr` of size `length` is writable.

Reviewer: @ripatel-fd I think CU calculation should be:

```
syscall_base + (32 / cpi_per_u) + (length / cpi_per_u)
```

Since we're reading the 32-byte sysvar ID and then returning a `length` slice of data. What do you think?

> - Each byte in the range starting at `var_addr` of size `length` is writable.

Reviewer: Sorry, you seem to agree on the idea in 0127 but not here. These calculations are highly similar. Why use mem_ops.rs?

> - Each byte in the range starting at `var_addr` of size `length` is writable.

Reviewer: Agave source doesn't do a great job of explaining why these CU values are what they are. For example, why is `syscall_base_cost` and `sysvar_base_cost` equal to `100` while `mem_op_base_cost` is `10`?

I'm assuming there's a reason the sysvar base is much higher than mem_op, so I'm going to use that as a safety net. If anyone explicitly disagrees I'll modify it (@ripatel-fd you said you don't _really_ care).

Thus, the CU calculation I've added is:

```
max(sysvar_base, (32 / cpi_per_u) + (length / cpi_per_u))
```

> - Each byte in the range starting at `var_addr` of size `length` is writable.

Reviewer: OK here's where we landed, no givesies-backsies.
```
syscall_base + (32 / cpi_per_u) + max(mem_op_base, (length / cpi_per_u))
```

and therefore slows down _all_ memory accesses.

## New Terminology

N/A.

## Detailed Design

A single `sol_get_sysvar` syscall can be defined, which can be used by all
forward-facing sysvar interfaces to retrieve data from any sysvar.

```c
/**
 * Retrieves a slice of data from a sysvar and copies it to VM memory.
 *
 * @param sysvar_id The identifier of the sysvar to retrieve data from.
 * @param var_addr  VM memory address to copy the retrieved data to.
 * @param offset    The offset to start copying data from.
 * @param length    The length of data to copy, in bytes.
 * @return          A 64-bit unsigned integer error code:
 *                    - 0 if the operation is successful.
 *                    - Non-zero error code.
 *
 * If the operation is not successful, data will not be written to the
 * provided VM memory address.
 */
uint64_t sol_get_sysvar(
  /* r1 */ void const * sysvar_id,
  /* r2 */ uint8_t *    var_addr,
  /* r3 */ uint64_t     offset,
  /* r4 */ uint64_t     length,
);

```

Generally, the following cases would be handled with errors:

- The sysvar data is unavailable.
- The sysvar data is corrupt.

> - The provided offset or length would be out of bounds on the sysvar data.

Reviewer: Sorry, is this not captured by bullet 3? Offset 900 would be out of bounds. If you request `0` length in-bounds, why error?

> - The provided offset or length would be out of bounds on the sysvar data.

Reviewer: Added!

> - The provided offset or length would be out of bounds on the sysvar data.

Reviewer: Gotcha. How's this then?

```md
If the following conditions are not met, this syscall will return an error:

- The sysvar data is available to read.
- The sysvar data is not corrupt.
- `offset` + `length` must be in the range `[0, 2^64)`.
- `var_addr` + `length` must be in the range `[0, 2^64)`.
- Each byte in the range starting at `var_addr` of size `length` must be 
  writable.
```

- Not all bytes in VM memory range `[var_addr, var_addr + length)` are writable.
- `offset + length` is not in `[0, 2^64)`.
- `var_addr + length` is not in `[0, 2^64)`.
- Compute budget is exceeded.

> The syscall returns `1` if the sysvar is not present in the Sysvar Cache.

Reviewer 3: Its just a list of sysvars. That list of sysvars is specified here. It is confusing to use the term Sysvar Cache when really what is meant is "sysvars supported by this syscall" which is more direct and more explicit given the language in the spec. No one has defined sysvar cache before this SIMD, and this SIMD hardly defines it. No spec or doc provides any color on this either. Lets keep it simple and unambiguous: 

1. the list of supported sysvars is the list here in this SIMD.
2. any new sysvar is included in this list of supported sysvars by default, unless otherwise specified.

The syscall returns `2` if `offset + length` is greater than the size of the
sysvar.

Otherwise, the syscall writes the sysvar data to the virtual memory at
`var_addr` and returns `0`.

### Compute Unit Usage

The syscall will always attempt to consume the same amount of CUs regardless of

> control flow.

Reviewer: Sorry, forgot you requested this change!

CU usage is proportional to the `length` parameter.

```
sysvar_base + (32 / cpi_per_u) + max(mem_op_base, (length / cpi_per_u))
```

- `sysvar_base`: Base cost of accessing a sysvar.
- `cpi_per_u`: Number of account data bytes per CU charged during CPI.

### Supported Sysvars

The proposed unified syscall interface will support all non-deprecated sysvars
in the Sysvar Cache.

Unless specified otherwise, any new sysvars added to the Sysvar Cache in the
future also become accessible through this syscall.

Existing syscalls to fetch sysvar data will be deprecated in favor of the new

> unified syscall proposed herein.

Reviewer: We can move this to a future SIMD, yeah. I think maybe just dropping the line altogether is more appropriate than adding "discouraged" imo.

> unified syscall proposed herein.

Reviewer 4: We have a mechanism in which we forbid new deployments to use certain syscalls but continue to support existing programs using them. See e.g.: https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/592107a907df841169f29a25b34799fd7ac9a2c9/programs/bpf_loader/src/syscalls/mod.rs#L275

And I am in favor of deprecating all other sysvar related syscalls that way.

> unified syscall proposed herein.

Reviewer: I took this line out. Deprecating seems delicate considering existing programs, and I think, based on all above comments, it falls outside the scope of this SIMD.

> unified syscall proposed herein.

Reviewer 4: As explained above, deprecating in this context does not mean rug-pulling existing programs but just no new deployments of programs which contain deprecated syscalls.

> unified syscall proposed herein.

Reviewer 3: Deprecating is a separate SIMD. its an easy one to justify once this lands.

The supported list of sysvars for the proposed syscall will be as follows:

- `SysvarC1ock11111111111111111111111111111111`
- `SysvarEpochRewards1111111111111111111111111`
- `SysvarEpochSchedu1e111111111111111111111111`
- `SysvarLastRestartS1ot1111111111111111111111`
- `SysvarRent111111111111111111111111111111111`
- `SysvarS1otHashes111111111111111111111111111`
- `SysvarS1otHistory11111111111111111111111111`
- `SysvarStakeHistory1111111111111111111111111`

Sysvar APIs at the SDK level are responsible for defining exactly how the data
can be accessed using the new syscall. For example, multiple SDKs may choose to
allow users to access one element from a list-based sysvar at a time, while only
a few may offer lookups or binary searches on the data.

## Impact

As mentioned as partial motivation for this proposal, the new syscall would
make changing and adding new sysvars in the future much easier, which would be
positively impactful to contributors.

> 

Reviewer 4: Another minor and not so obvious impact is that this changes the verification of supported sysvar related syscalls from verification time to runtime.

Reviewer: Added a note on this in the section you've commented.

 * @param var_addr  VM memory address to copy the retrieved data to.
 * @param offset    The offset to start copying data from.
 * @param length    The length of data to copy, in bytes.
 * @return          A 64-bit unsigned integer error code:
 *                    - 0 if the operation is successful.
 *                    - Non-zero error code.
 *
 * If the operation is not successful, data will not be written to the
 * provided VM memory address.
 */
uint64_t sol_get_sysvar(
  /* r1 */ void const * sysvar_id,
  /* r2 */ uint8_t *    var_addr,
  /* r3 */ uint64_t     offset,
  /* r4 */ uint64_t     length,
);

```

### Control Flow

The syscall aborts the virtual machine if any of these conditions are true:

- Not all bytes in VM memory range `[sysvar_id, sysvar_id + 32)` are readable.
- Not all bytes in VM memory range `[var_addr, var_addr + length)` are writable.
- `offset + length` is not in `[0, 2^64)`.
- `var_addr + length` is not in `[0, 2^64)`.
- Compute budget is exceeded.

The syscall returns `1` if the sysvar is not present in the Sysvar Cache.

The syscall returns `2` if `offset + length` is greater than the size of the

> sysvar.

Reviewer 2: if we are introducing a distinction between hard and soft errors (successful failures?) we need to specify what order the checks happen in, because a set of inputs that could trigger both a soft and a hard error needs to trigger the same one on all impls

im inclined to want to check the _soft_ conditions first, and bail with the appropriate code if they are met, because there is no possibility of the language runtime accidentally returning them later

the more i think about this tho the more worried i get about the possibility of an attacker crafting a transaction where writing to the output buffer triggers a segfault on one validator impl but not the other

Reviewer 2: incidentally im assuming this means that a `length` of 0 should noop and return `Ok(0)`

Reviewer: The intention by @ripatel-fd was to have "graceful errors" that won't abort the VM, but maybe there's a case to be made to get rid of these. I believe the intention was to handle a scenario where an on-chain program may use the syscall directly (without the handler) and give them the ability to gracefully handle errors, rather than the VM panicking.

https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/127#discussion_r1544351726

However, I'm pretty sure we dove into the error propagation after this discussion, and if a syscall throws an `InstructionError`, that will bubble up to a `ProgramError` in the executing program, so perhaps _all_ of these syscall errors are actually graceful?

https://discord.com/channels/428295358100013066/967028962746327060/1222861983842570294

Reviewer 2: oh to be clear my preferred solution would be to redefine the nonzero return cases to also abort, unless theres a concrete usecase we are hoping to support with this

Reviewer: Right I agree on condensing the control flow, but I'm saying I don't think it actually aborts. I think the error bubbles up. It would have to panic to abort.

Reviewer 2: as far as i can tell, returning an error does abort unconditionally, after testing with `Clock::get` this afternoon and again now. this must happen somewhere inside solana-rbpf but because of that fact plus ffi, macros, the separation between syscall registration and invocation, and thiserror, it is too difficult for me to untangle and locate the place where this actually occurs

what i do know is `solana_program::syscalls::sol_get_clock_sysvar` returns a `u64` rather than a `Result`, and control never resumes inside the solana-program `Sysvar::get` impl if you return an `Err` inside `SyscallGetClockSysvar`

@Lichtso could you enlighten us?

Reviewer: So, @2501babe you're correct that syscall errors abort the VM. I just ran a little test to investigate further. Turns out I already ran this test, lol.

Here's the block of code in question.

https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/297a7aa40a42d5dad4002d11da10ef3748876041/program-runtime/src/invoke_context.rs#L514-L534

```rust
let result = match vm.program_result {
    ProgramResult::Ok(_) => {
        stable_log::program_success(&logger, &program_id);
        Ok(())
    }
    ProgramResult::Err(ref err) => {
        if let EbpfError::SyscallError(syscall_error) = err {
            if let Some(instruction_err) = syscall_error.downcast_ref::<InstructionError>()
            {
                stable_log::program_failure(&logger, &program_id, instruction_err);
                Err(instruction_err.clone())
            } else {
                stable_log::program_failure(&logger, &program_id, syscall_error);
                Err(InstructionError::ProgramFailedToComplete)
            }
        } else {
            stable_log::program_failure(&logger, &program_id, err);
            Err(InstructionError::ProgramFailedToComplete)
        }
    }
};
```

The `vm.program_result` is a `StableResult<u64, EbpfError>`. As you can see from the snippet, the program's result can be any `Ok(u64)`, but we bury that `u64` value. We only care that it was successful.

The snippet also shows that valid `InstructionError` values can be bubbled up, although **the VM is still aborted**.

It's not possible to catch a syscall error, even if it is a valid `InstructionError`.

```rust
fn process_instruction(
    _program_id: &Pubkey,
    accounts: &[AccountInfo],
    _instruction_data: &[u8],
) -> ProgramResult {
    let mut accounts_iter = accounts.iter();

    let vote_account = next_account_info(&mut accounts_iter)?;

    msg!("Log!");

    if let Err(e) = get_epoch_stake(vote_account.key) {
        msg!("Error: {:?}", e);
    }

    msg!("Another log!");

    // Should always return Ok
    Ok(())
}
```

The reason the syscall definitions and the program stubs define the syscall as returning a `u64`, is because it _may_ return an `InstructionError` that can be bubbled up to the client, such as a `BanksClient` or `RpcClient`, but the VM has aborted nonetheless.

I guess it means we can use `InstructionError` to define specific error codes from within the syscall, if we want. Anything that throws an `EbfError`, such as [`translate`](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/033bcfcab5696839c0ad10486ddf4c85fc73358b/programs/bpf_loader/src/syscalls/mod.rs#L480-L490) - even if it's an `EbfError::SyscallError`, is going to route to `InstructionError::ProgramFailedToComplete`.

Reviewer: With _all of that_ being said, @ripatel-fd was making the case of gracefully returning an error, which can only be done by doing `Ok(1)`, `Ok(2)`, etc.

With that in mind, ordering shouldn't _really_ matter, since anything that throws within the syscall is automatically an abort, while returned `Ok(..)` values are returned. The handler is then responsible for translating those `Ok(T)` values into `Ok(bytes)` or `Err(ProgramError::V)`.

Reviewer: In that spirit, I think the specification is accurate.

Reviewer 2: returning `Ok(1)` doesnt halt execution tho. so if there is a case where one impl hits an `Err` whereas the other hits one of the `Ok` cases first, there would be a consensus failure. the order has to be de defined or else the `Ok` errors have to change to `Err`

Reviewer: Ahhh, I see what you're saying. I think it probably makes sense to say if you provide a condition that should abort the VM, then the VM should be aborted, period.

In other words, VM violations should take precedence. One should only receive a graceful error if the VM wouldn't be violated otherwise. Open to discussion that, though.

Reviewer: If you hate what I just added, then I can do pseudocode, but it seemed sufficient and concise.

Reviewer: We were planning to merge today, and looks like based on above there's acceptance of what I suggested, then committed?
@2501babe @ripatel-fd

Reviewer 2: think we got ourselves a simd!

 */
uint64_t sol_get_sysvar(
  /* r1 */ void const * sysvar_id,
  /* r2 */ uint8_t *    var_addr,
  /* r3 */ uint64_t     offset,
  /* r4 */ uint64_t     length,
);

```

### Control Flow

The syscall aborts the virtual machine if any of these conditions are true:

- Not all bytes in VM memory range `[sysvar_id, sysvar_id + 32)` are readable.
- Not all bytes in VM memory range `[var_addr, var_addr + length)` are writable.
- `offset + length` is not in `[0, 2^64)`.
- `var_addr + length` is not in `[0, 2^64)`.
- Compute budget is exceeded.

All VM violations (above) are checked first, before to returning one of the
following error codes. The following checks are completed in the order they
appear below.

The syscall returns the following graceful codes:

- `2` if the sysvar data is not present in the Sysvar Cache.
- `1` if `offset + length` is greater than the length of the sysvar data.
- `0` if the process completed successfully and the requested sysvar data was
  written to the virtual memory at `var_addr`.

### Compute Unit Usage

The syscall will always consume the same amount of CUs regardless of
control flow.

CU usage is proportional to the `length` parameter.

```

> sysvar_base + (32 / cpi_per_u) + max(mem_op_base, (length / cpi_per_u))

Reviewer 5: Sorry for the flyby here, but I was looking at this implementation in Agave and was curious about the `(32 / cpi_bytes_per_unit)` term here. `cpi_bytes_per_unit` is currently set to `250` on mainnet, so that factor will always be 0.

It's not a big deal, and thankfully it's explicitly defined, but was there a reason to keep it separate rather than combining it with `length`? Ie instead of doing:

```
sysvar_base + max(mem_op_base, ((length + 32) / cpi_per_u))
```

Reviewer: The intention was to apply `cpi_per_u` to the 32-byte sysvar ID, then to the length (or mem_op_base, whichever is max). So with that being said, what you've suggested would probably make more sense. Should be adjust this?

Reviewer 5: Since this syscall is part of 2.0, which is really close to mainnet, it might be a bit late to do a quick change. That would probably require an amendment SIMD + new feature gate, which sounds like a lot of work for what's essentially a rounding difference of 1 CU on a syscall :sweat_smile: I think we can leave as is for now. Thanks for the response!

Reviewer 6: {
  "metadata": {
    "version": "0.0.1",
    "origin": "shank"
  },
  "additionalPrograms": ["proposals/0042-svm-fraud-proofs.md"],
  "standard": "codama",
  "version": "1.0.0"
}

- `var_addr + length` is not in `[0, 2^64)`.
- Compute budget is exceeded.

> All VM violations (above) are checked first, before attempting to return
> gracefully.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All VM violations (above) are checked first, before to returning one of the following error codes. The following checks are completed in the order they appear below.
```

Reviewer: Note I flipped these around since we can't know the length of the sysvar data if it's not found.
